Control of Complex Maneuvers for a Quadrotor UAV using Geometric
Methods on SE(3)

arXiv:1003.2005v4 [math.OC] 9 Sep 2011

Taeyoung Lee∗ , Melvin Leok† , and N. Harris McClamroch
Abstract— This paper provides new results for control of
complex flight maneuvers for a quadrotor unmanned aerial
vehicle. The flight maneuvers are defined by a concatenation of
flight modes, each of which is achieved by a nonlinear controller
that solves an output tracking problem. A mathematical model
of the quadrotor UAV rigid body dynamics, defined on the
configuration space SE(3), is introduced as a basis for the
analysis. We focus on three output tracking problems, namely
(1) outputs given by the vehicle attitude, (2) outputs given by
the three position variables for the vehicle center of mass, and
(3) output given by the three velocity variables for the vehicle
center of mass. A nonlinear tracking controller is developed on
the special Euclidean group SE(3) for each flight mode, and the
closed loop is shown to have desirable properties that are almost
global in each case. Several numerical examples, including one
example in which the quadrotor recovers from being initially
upside down and another example that includes switching
and transitions between different flight modes, illustrate the
versatility and generality of the proposed approach.

I. INTRODUCTION
A quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) consists of
two pairs of counter-rotating rotors and propellers, located
at the vertices of a square frame. It is capable of vertical
take-off and landing (VTOL), but it does not require complex
mechanical linkages, such as swash plates or teeter hinges,
that commonly appear in typical helicopters. Due to its simple mechanical structure, it has been envisaged for various
applications such as surveillance or mobile sensor networks
as well as for educational purposes.
Despite the substantial interest in quadrotor UAVs, little
attention has been paid to constructing nonlinear control systems that can achieve complex aerobatic maneuvers. Linear
control systems such as proportional-derivative controllers
or linear quadratic regulators are widely used to enhance the
stability properties of an equilibrium [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].
mode; Sections V and VI present results for the position
controlled flight mode, and the velocity controlled flight
mode, respectively. Several numerical results that demonstrate complex aerobatic maneuvers for a typical quadrotor
UAV are presented in Section VII.
II. QUADROTOR DYNAMICS MODEL
Consider a quadrotor UAV model illustrated in Figure
1. This is a system of four identical rotors and propellers
located at the vertices of a square, which generate a thrust
and torque normal to the plane of this square. We choose
an inertial reference frame {~e1 , ~e2 , ~e3 } and a body-fixed
frame {~b1 , ~b2 , ~b3 }. The origin of the body-fixed frame is
located at the center of mass of this vehicle. The first
and the second axes of the body-fixed frame, ~b1 , ~b2 , lie
and b1c ∈ S2 is selected to be orthogonal to b3c , thereby
guaranteeing that Rc ∈ SO(3). We assume that
(46)

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS ILLUSTRATING
COMPLEX FLIGHT MANEUVERS
Numerical results are presented to demonstrate the prior
approach for performing complex flight maneuvers for a
typical quadrotor UAV. The parameters are chosen to match
a quadrotor UAV described in [23].
controllers for these flight modes, we have demonstrated
that the quadrotor UAV can perform complex acrobatic
maneuvers. Several different complex flight maneuvers were
demonstrated in the numerical examples.
A PPENDIX
A. Properties of the Hat Map
The hat map ˆ· : R3 → so(3) is defined as


0
−x3 x2
0
exponential stability according to Proposition 3, and during
that time period, tracking errors are bounded. Therefore,
the zero equilibrium of the tracking error is exponentially
attractive.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Valenti, B. Bethke, G. Fiore, and J. How, “Indoor multi-vehicle
flight testbed for fault detection, isolation, and recovery,” in Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference
(2006).
[2] G. Hoffmann, H. Huang, S. Waslander, and C. Tomlin, “Quadrotor
helicopter flight dynamics and control: Theory and experiment,” in
